From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof. This is the Daily. [music]
[music] Even for an administration that
has taken revenge to an extreme, the
decision to open a criminal
investigation [music]
into Fed Chairman Jerome Pal has stunned
the worlds of [music] business and
politics.
Today, my colleagues Colby Smith and
Glenn Thrush explain how [music] the
investigation came about, the panic it
unleashed, and why it might have made
the Fed [music] chair stronger than
ever.
[music]
It's Thursday, January 15th.
Glenn Colby, welcome to the show. It's
great to have you here.
>> Thank you.
>> Thanks. It's good to be back.
>> So, for the past several months, we've
been tracking this simmering conflict
between President Trump and Federal
Reserve Chair Jerome Pal. Trump has been
trying to push PAL for a while now to
lower interest rates as fast as
possible, and Pal has been resisting.
And then in the past few days really
that fight entered a new and
unprecedented phase. Federal prosecutors
opened a criminal investigation into PAL
and that set off a firestorm in
Washington. You two have been covering
this moment. Glenn from your perch as
our Justice Department reporter, Colby
as our Fed reporter. And I want to start
by asking you, Colby, to help us get up
to speed on how exactly we got from
simmering conflict to this extremely
tense moment. So, it all centers around
interest rates. As you mentioned, Trump
has been all over the Fed for not
lowering borrowing costs as fast as he
would like. They've lowered interest
rates three times over the course of
three meetings, but it hasn't been
enough for the president. He is facing a
lot of pressure from constituents who
are worried about affordability issues,
are worried about high inflation, about
a weakening labor market. And all of
this is making Trump feel like the Fed
needs to be doing more. And standing in
the way of that is Chair Powell.
>> Right. We've seen Trump put a ton of
pressure on Powell personally. He's
threatened to fire him. He's called him
names. And all of that has really not
done all that much, if anything, it
seems, to make Pal move on interest
rates.
>> That's right. But then over the summer,
he found a new angle. And what he
focused on was this renovation project
that was happening at the Fed's
headquarters in Washington. There had
been massive cost overruns. This thing
was running about $700 million over
budget, and it was looking like it was
going to cost somewhere in the ballpark
of $2.5 billion. And when Trump saw
this, he seized on it and used it to go
after Powell and say this Fed chair must
be incompetent and mismanaging this
project or maybe something like fraud
was happening here. Okay. So, I've read
a lot about this renovation and it does
sound like it was extremely costly and
did go way over budget, but do we have
any indication that there was anything
criminal here? There was fraud.
>> So, it's certainly expensive. I mean,
$2.5 billion for a building is no
laughing matter. And what we do know is
that the costs were running about 700
million over budget or so. So, clearly
the project had gone a little bit ary
here. I think what's important context
though is that these are 100-year-old
buildings. They've never been
comprehensively renovated before. There
was a lot of work to be done to kind of
maintain the original features. Um, and
they also were dealing with higher costs
for materials and labor. But I think
it's important to note that cost
overruns, they're not a crime. But
you're saying that Trump sees in these
cost overruns an opportunity to gain
leverage over PAL. Glenn, from your
reporting on the Justice Department,
just explain how the White House lands
on an investigation as the next move
here
>> because the Justice Department has
become for the White House its principal
conduit for achieving retribution or
intimidating political adversaries. And
Trump has a lot of people in his orbit
telling him things that he wants to
hear. Chief among them is a guy by the
name of Bill Py. Most people haven't
heard of him because he runs a
relatively obscure agency.
>> Yeah. Explain who he is.
>> He's a former real estate developer and
he runs the agency that deals with
housing finance, which seems like a
pretty benign and non-controversial
post. This is a guy who's been pushing
Trump to go after a couple of his
enemies on mortgage fraud. Leticia
James, the New York State Attorney
General, Adam Schiff, the senator from
California, who has been a burr under
Trump's saddle, and recently he's been
pushing Trump to use this renovation as
a way to go after Powell. And what
you're saying is the guy who is
suggesting this, this official Bill Py,
he may seem obscure to many of us, but
actually within Trump's orbit, he's kind
of distinguished himself as something
like an unofficial chief retribution
officer. He's engineering many of these
pushes to go after figures that Trump
wants to see punished.
>> What makes this one different, however,
is this isn't about going after an
enemy. This is about applying leverage
for political result and to pursue
Trump's goal to gain more control over
the Fed uh and economic policy at a time
uh when his approval ratings on the
economy are in the tank. So PY has been
in Trump's ear telling him that this is
a possibility that something could
really be done against Powell
>> which of course we now know they did
take action against Powell. So tell me
about how this all came about. What
exactly happened?
>> So enter Janine Piro. She is the US
attorney for Washington DC, the District
of Columbia. And she is the person who
has jurisdiction over the Fed
headquarters. So this is in her
territory. Piro is obviously somebody
who has been close to Donald Trump for a
long time, decades really. She is the
former Westchester District Attorney.
She's a former Fox host. She is somebody
who talks to Trump constantly. H
>> pro at some point in the fall, we think
around November, starts reading press
accounts, including one in the New York
Post that really hits home for her, and
she decides to assign a couple of
prosecutors in her office to begin a
preliminary inquiry into Powell's
activities.
>> She's reading press stories, to be
clear, she's reading press stories that
are talking about this renovation and
the fact that it is costly.
>> Yeah. and really press stories from
Trump friendly news outlets that are
emphasizing the potential culpability of
Powell in something nefarious. So this
motivates her and she starts moving
forward. Our sense is that this started
off pretty slowly, but by December this
starts to really pick up and Piro's
office sends the Fed two letters
requesting information. Now, we don't
have copies of these letters, but
they've been described to us. And one
PIO associate said these were among the
most polite letters her office ever sent
to anyone.
>> Colby, is that sense shared within the
Fed? Like, how were these letters
received?
>> These were seen as, you know, casual
outreach. I mean, breezy almost in a
way. Nothing of the sort that would lead
to a criminal investigation and an
imminent one at that. There was no
mention of an investigation, no mention
of subpoenas, no deadline even for a
response. They were over the holiday
period. It was around December 19th and
then the second email came on December
29th. And there was no real sense of
kind of urgency in terms of a response.
And so the Fed sits tight. They don't
respond to those letters and they never
expected what would happen next.
Okay, I get that these letters landed
during a kind of dead holiday week and
they didn't come with a deadline, but
these were prosecutors asking for
information, right? Like why didn't the
Fed respond? Do we know? So, I think
there's a lot we don't know about the
like ins and outs of their responses
here, but I think what's been clear,
especially about these renovations, is
that this is something that the Fed has
had to provide a lot of answers for, and
they've provided a ton of information
since this whole controversy broke out
back in July. That was a time when there
was so much scrutiny over this project,
which is a two and a half billion dollar
sprawling multi-year undertaking that
had drawn so much attention that even
the president came and visited the
active construction site and openly
sparred with Chair Powell over the true
cost of the project. So this is
something that they had answered
countless lawmaker questions about, not
only about the nature of the cost
overruns, but what the specific plans
around the project were going to be. So
I think in a lot of ways the perception
was there's a lot of information already
out there about these renovations and I
don't think that they thought that this
required an immediate response.
>> Got it. So, the lack of response to
these letters may have been because Pal
is basically saying, "We have been
forthcoming and we haven't done anything
wrong." So, Glenn, tell me, how do we
get from these apparently very polite
letters to a criminal subpoena?
>> It's right here that this collides with
the pressure campaign that Trump is
ramping up against his own justice
department. A couple of days earlier,
very interesting closed-d dooror meeting
between Trump and dozens and dozens of
US attorneys from around the country,
including Janine Piro. Trump lashes out
at them, calls them weak, accuses them
of not aggressively enough pursuing his
retribution agenda. And it is just a
couple of days later that Piro makes the
decision to start playing hard ball with
the Fed. And then on Sunday night, we
break the story that Piro initiated a
criminal investigation into the Fed. And
then Powell comes out and says his
office got subpoenas on Friday.
>> And the way Powell did that was
extraordinary.
>> Good evening.
On Friday, the Department of Justice
served the Federal Reserve with grand
jury subpoenas, threatening a criminal.
>> Shortly after we broke the story on
Sunday night, the Fed released a
two-minute video. It featured Powell
standing alone in front of a lectern
reading a statement.
>> This unprecedented action should be seen
in the broader context of the
administration's threats and ongoing
pressure.
>> And it basically called out the
president for these legal threats.
>> This new threat is not about my
testimony last June or about the
renovation of the Federal Reserve
buildings. and he made clear that all of
these legal threats related to the
renovation,
>> those are pretexts,
>> were nothing more than pretexts to put
pressure on the central bank to lower
interest rates.
>> This is about whether the Fed will be
able to continue to set interest rates
based on evidence and economic
conditions or whether instead monetary
policy will be directed by political
pressure or intimidation.
>> And Colby, you've been covering the Fed
and Chair Pal for a very long time. So
just explain for me why this video was
so extraordinary.
>> So we hadn't really seen Powell directly
respond to anything the president has
really done. Now what that has looked
like is Powell kind of brushing aside
all of the various attacks that the
president has thrown his way. Anytime
he's insulted him, anytime he's
threatened to fire him or tell him to
resign, Powell has pretty much ignored
that.
>> I have served at the Federal Reserve
under four administrations. Republicans
and Democrats alike.
>> But this was different. This was not a
rhetorical attack. This was not
something that I think the chair thought
that he could ignore. I think the
thinking there was that this was a
moment to step up and say something
strong about Fed independence and to
show that, you know, the Fed was not
going to be pushed around any longer.
>> Public service sometimes requires
standing firm in the face of threats.
I will continue to do the job the Senate
confirmed me to do with integrity and a
commitment to serving the American
people. [music] Thank you.
And once that video goes out and we hear
[music] Powell say those words out loud,
everything changes.
[music]
We'll be right back.
Okay. So, Pal comes out with this
statement and it really changes the
dynamic. How? Walk me through that. What
happens?
We see a backlash from Republicans and
Trump allies across the board that we
had not seen after the announcement of
investigations and prosecutions. This is
totally different. [music]
The first person out of the gate was Tom
Tillis.
>> I mean, the president said he wasn't in
the mix. Another example of amateur hour
as far as I'm concerned.
>> Do you think
>> he's a kind of a moderate Republican
from North Carolina? He's not running
for reelection. Those are always the
people who speak loudest in Washington.
And he comes out and he says, "President
Trump, whoever you send up to the hill
to replace Powell, I'm not even going to
vote on if you continue down this road
on this prosecution."
>> So, should they drop the investigation?
>> I'm not going to get into that. What I'm
going to do is drop any consideration
for any board confirmation until it's
done.
>> That just hasn't happened before. And
then in the succeeding hours and and
really over the next 36 hours, we just
saw this cascade of criticism.
>> I will be shocked if he has done
anything wrong [music]
>> from places Trump isn't used to seeing
criticism from. Fox News.
>> Well, I'm not sure this investigation
will ever go anywhere. I doubt very
seriously that Jerome Pal lied to
Congress in any intentional way. He may
have been mistaken in something that he
said, but I think he's an honorable man.
And
>> Larry Cuddlo, he was a terrible Fed
chair, but he's [music] not a criminal.
one of his top economic adviserss during
the first term and somebody Trump
watches on TV all the time said this was
a stupid idea and other members of the
Senate including John Thoon the majority
leader
>> if the justice department is pursuing
something I hope they have a smoking gun
[music]
>> expressed extreme skepticism about this
and said that they needed to see real
evidence that Powell had committed
criminality [music] for this thing to go
forward with their approval
Okay. So, I understand that Pal is,
you're saying, very trusted among many
people on the Hill, but Glenn, we know
that Republicans have been very willing
to go along with a lot from Trump, a lot
of retribution efforts, even a lot of
attacks on the Fed before this. So, why
do they break with him on this so
forcefully?
In less than 6 months, the midterm
elections are going to hit full swing.
And there is nothing that makes
Republicans speak up louder and
challenge their own president than the
potential prospect of losing their jobs.
And anything that threatens the
potential stability or the economy, they
are going to fight back. And that's
exactly what we're seeing. And I also
think it's important to note that
nothing's going to rattle financial
markets more than thinking that the
central bank is an independent. And it's
been notable that we haven't seen more
of a market reaction. I think some
people were expecting in the aftermath
of this that this would be a seismic
moment. But a lot of what I hear is that
having so many Republican lawmakers come
out and say that they don't stand by
attacks of this nature has has really
helped to alleviate fears that the Fed
isn't suddenly going to fold here and no
longer act independently. But again, I
mean, it's not just the economy that I
think these lawmakers are focused on.
It's really Wall Street, which we know
is a barometer of success for the
president. and just say quickly why it
is that Wall Street will react so
strongly to the appearance that the
Fed's independence is really being
threatened.
>> Well, so much of the stability of the
financial system rests on the fact that
we have a central bank that wants to
pursue low stable inflation and a
healthy labor market. And if that has
changed, then I think people's
assumptions about the financial system
in the US start to change. That
independence is what bolsters people's
confidence in the dollar in US
treasuries. And so if you flip the
script on Fed independence, then it
really starts to change people's
perspective of just how stable is the US
economy and its financial system.
>> Another way to think about this is this
is like pulling out the one Jenga piece
you cannot afford to pull out. This is
not something that Republicans want.
It's not something that adds to
stability. Look, when the Justice
Department goes after James Comey or
Tish James, it compromises fundamental
issues of of rule of law, but you know,
it doesn't imperil the overall economy.
That's something Republicans on the Hill
cannot abide.
>> And what has the Trump White House
response to this rare showing of
disscent been? Like, does Piro, for
example, see her actions as a mistake?
Now,
>> Janine Piro's reaction to this has been
really interesting. When the blowback
happened, and it was pretty much
instantaneous. Piro responded by
downplaying the seriousness of this
investigation. She essentially said that
the lack of response is what
precipitated this, that an investigation
is far from being a prosecution. Piro
has downplayed the likelihood that this
will result in prosecutions. So, she did
something that you almost never see
Justice Department people do in the
Trump era, and that is walk it back ever
so slightly,
>> but she's somebody who is attempting to
balance her desire to please the boss
>> with maintaining some semblance of her
own image as an impartial prosecutor
motivated by facts rather than politics.
And who knows, while the Republicans on
the Hill and the international monetary
community might think Piro has gone way
overboard, Trump to some extent is quite
likely to see this as her executing
something that he wanted accomplished
>> and do we have an understanding of how
Trump is perceiving this? What's his
reaction been?
>> So Trump is not necessarily like backing
away from this. He tried to create some
distance between himself and the
investigation. and he said he didn't
know anything about it, but he's
certainly not taking the opportunity to,
you know, shift his tone as it relates
to Powell.
>> He's billions of dollars over budget, so
he either is incompetent or he's
crooked. I don't know what he is, but he
doesn't certainly doesn't do a very good
job.
>> Recently, he, you know, called him a
jerk and said that it didn't really
matter much because he'd be out soon.
>> Last week, the average 30-year mortgage
up below 6% for the first time in many
years. It's coming down very rapidly and
that's not with the help of the Fed. If
I had the help of the Fed, it would be
easier, but that jerk will be gone soon.
>> Referencing the fact that Powell's term
is up in May. But what we do know is
that inside the administration, it's a
bit more complicated. Treasury Secretary
Scott Bessant, who's leading the process
to find Powell's replacement as chair,
was not on board with this decision at
all. He called the president directly
when he found out the investigation was
moving forward and you know expressed
his frustration and told the president
that this could impede their plans to
confirm a new chair for the Fed. And is
that true Colby? Like could this
actually impact the administration's
ability to nominate Pal's replacement?
>> Yeah, this could be a big impediment. I
mean, as Glenn mentioned earlier, it was
Senator Tillis who kind of raised his
hand and said, you know, I'm not going
to be on board with approving or moving
along any of the nominations that the
administration is putting forward for
this chair position. And that's a big
problem because he's on the Senate
Banking Committee and they are
responsible for vetting and questioning
and then voting on who proceeds to the
full Senate for a vote. And if they lose
Tillis, that could result in a
deadlocked vote. So, it could very
easily be the case that the whole Fed
nomination process gets thrown off the
rails. Second to that, it's very
possible that Chair Powell decides to
stay on as a governor after this point.
His term as chair is up in May, but he
technically can stay on at the central
bank until 2028 when his term as a
governor expires. Now, this is important
because what Trump really wants to do is
to put as many of his supporters at the
Fed as possible. And if Powell doesn't
leave, that blocks another vacancy that
Trump would have had to put forward
someone that he wanted in that position.
>> Can we just pause and cogitate for a
second on that? Like what you just said
is essentially that this dramatic move
against Pal may have both made it much
harder for Trump to put his own person
in as the head of the central bank and
it also may prompt Pal to stay on at the
bank in a voting capacity for a while
longer than Trump probably wants. The
paradox here is Trump may have lost a
significant amount of his authority over
the American economy by trying to assert
dominance over these institutions. His
reach might very well have exceeded his
grasp. I know we say this a lot in a lot
of context, but but Trump is, you know,
not too far from the second half of his
second and lame duck term here. And he
may have pushed this a bit too far. He's
been able to have his way with the
Justice Department. He's been able to
have his way with Republicans on
Congress until fairly recently.
>> He can extract a dictator from
Venezuela, it seems, without much
resistance.
>> Exa Exactly. Exactly. But this is a guy
who's got a 40% approval rating and
there are limits to his authority. And
what he's also hitting here are the
institutional strengths that were
created, this bull work in the Federal
Reserve in the early 20th century that
were intended to withstand precisely
this kind of an executive power grab.
And this might be a real moment,
potentially a high watermark in terms of
Trump's control over the economy. This
is the kind of mistake that presidents
tend to make. We tend to think of Donald
Trump as being completely outside of the
stream of history. But presidents
typically in their second terms often
times after an election that they
believe validated them tend to uh reach
for goals that they do not have the
political support to achieve. Time will
tell if this is one of those instances.
But the early indications are Donald
Trump may have gotten himself into some
trouble here. And for Powell, Colby and
the Fed, what is the lesson in all of
this? This institution that prides
itself on being so careful with its
words and so cautious to not engage in
any partisan behavior has now come out
and defended itself forcefully and it
seems to be working. So what's the
upshot? I think the upshot here is that
the Fed in being so quiet and so
non-confrontational in the past year, I
think they built up a lot of respect and
goodwill. And so when the time came when
the president took too aggressive of a
step and attacked the institution in a
way that so many people thought was a
step too far, when they finally did
respond, everyone sat up and listened.
And I think that now we are entering a
new era where officials feel a little
bit more forthright in calling out the
president for what he is doing. And that
in turn I think is going to help to
bolster the independence of the Fed
which had been under you know relentless
attack in the past year or so. And in
some ways in trying to weaken the Fed,
the president and the administration
only made it stronger.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Well, Colby Glenn, thank you so much.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you. [music]
[music]
We'll be right back.
>> Here's what else you need to know.
Today,
>> we have been we have been informed by
very important sources on the other
side. They've said the killing is
stopped and the executions won't take
place. There were supposed to be a lot
of executions today and that the
executions won't take place.
>> On Wednesday, President Trump said that
the Iranian government appeared [music]
to have stopped killing protesters.
Trump had been threatening to attack
Iran if the government harmed
demonstrators and [music] he didn't say
Wednesday whether he was still
considering military action. Does
>> this mean military action is now off the
table against Iran? and we're going to
watch it and see what the process is,
but we were given a very good uh very
good statement by people that are um
aware of what's going on.
>> Iran had announced on Wednesday that it
was closing airspace across the country
to [music] commercial flights and the US
military had evacuated personnel from
Qatar [music] amid the tensions. But
after Trump's comments, a US military
official told the Times that the
Pentagon was ready to bring troops
[music] back to the base in Qatar,
saying the president had given a quote
offramp.
[music]
And Senate Republicans successfully
blocked an effort to force President
Trump to seek congressional approval for
any military action in [music]
Venezuela.
Last week, it seemed that the measure to
curb the president's war powers would
come up for a vote after five [music]
Republican senators said they would
support it. But on Wednesday, after
speaking with officials from the Trump
administration, two of those senators,
[music]
Josh Holly of Missouri and Todd Young of
Indiana, flipped their positions [music]
and joined the push to kill the measure.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Mary Wilson and Michael Simon Johnson.
It was edited by [music] Devin Taylor
and Mark George, contains music by Diane
Wong and Pat [music] McCusker, and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
[music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitro. See you tomorrow. [music]